ok so moving on now let's actually
run this db browser program we
started to do that at the end of the
last video so I'm just going to start it
started up on your operating system this
is what it looks like now it won't display
anything obviously until we connect to
a database
one thing to note about the DB browser
is that if you use it to make changes to
the database will actually locked the
database file and you'll no longer be
able to access the database from a java
application so if that happens you can
actually come up here and go to file
close database and that will be enabled
if you've got a database open and that
will release the lock so you'll be able
to use it again so keep that in mind
that if you're getting some weird errors
in your java code it could be because
you got the database opened in DB
browser and you need to close it so
you're releasing the lock
it's time to write some java code we're
going to start by creating the same test
database we created from the command
line to see how to connect to a
database using jdbc so let's go ahead now
and open IntelliJ and create a new
project will call this one test db
....in my case i'm going to save
it into the folder where I got my
other java programs click on finish and
wait for that to start
alright so one of the first things that
we need to do is we need to add the
sqlite jdbc driver to the project
so let's do that by going to file and
project structure we need to select
libraries over here from the left-hand
side we need to press the green button
which green on Windows but may or may
not be on the mac which it isn't here or
on linux but in any case we want to click on
this plus button here and select java
from the pop-up then we need to
navigate to the sqlite jdbc jar file
that we downloaded and add it my cases in
the downloads folder we have the sqlite
jdbc .jar so i'm going to open
that confirms that is going to be added
to the selected modules which is this
currently open project click on ok it's
now showing as you can see your screen
as a library we can click on OK will be
able to access that in our application
so the first thing we want to do
at this point is create the database now
in a real-world application often
a database will ship with the application
or the database will exist on a server
somewhere but sometimes you might want
the application to create the database
the first time it runs or perhaps the
first time you use it does something now
when using sqlite connecting to a
database that doesn't exist will create
the database so we don't have to create
the database in a separate step we just
have to try and connect to the database
if it doesn't exist sqlite will
create it for us now all jdbc drivers
need a connection string that are used
to connect to the database now the exact
format of the connection string will
vary from database to database for one
thing they always have in common is that
it starts with jdbc
colon now for sqlite we followed
jdbc colon with sqlite colon and
then we specify the location of the
database now other databases may well
require just additional information for
example they might require user and
password and we can also specify
databases attributes with the connection
string for example we may specify
that we want to sqlite database to
be stored in memory so to find out
what's required a connection string for
a given database you can check out the
jdbc drivers documentation as I have
previously mentioned nothing is a
hundred percent portable and this is one
area that varies from database to
database now we don't want to connect to
the databases we created in the earlier
videos so let's actually call this
database test java dot DB so let's start
the program i'm going to put in what you
typically do on a Windows platform then
change it to a mac going to start with a
try...
....
...
...and you had a
...file in windows which was...
....and you want that file to be
access you do something like....
...
....
how you typically access it if your
database is going to be on the d drive
in the databases folder
I'm just going to leave copy of that
line for windows and mac equivalent what
I'm going to do is put it in the path
you can see at the top here and put this in
the actual root path of this project for
one of a better place
so what I'm going to do is just
duplicate that path on the top there for
the map....
....
...making sure I've got my case
hopefully correct so that's going to
create the database in this folder
depending on what version of
IntelliJ your running have mentioned this
before in the course but the most recent
versions are starting to add this
helpful although annoying
annoying feature that prefixes all the
method parameters with their names now
it's turned on by default but luckily
can turn this off fairly easily by just
coming into setting so let's actually go
and do that now because i'm not
sure about you but I find it a little
bit frustrating so guarantees
settings or preferences in this case
you want to select editor in general
and then under appearance their this show
parameter name hints i'm going to take
the check box off for that to turn off
that quote unquote feature so we're not
bother with that anymore you can see
that now remove that and I personally thinks
more readable with it removed but it's
up to you as to which way you want to go
alright so what are we doing here well
with we setup a connection string
we called driver manager . get
connection and that accepts the
connection string and returns the
connection instance now the method may
throw s sql exception
that's why we're trying to catch that
just putting out an exception message
now if the jdbc driver isn't on the
classpath then you actually get a
classnotfoundexception so this is the
new way of connecting to a database when
using jdbc 4.0 and above when using
earlier versions we actually had to
register and load jdbc drivers by
calling the class . for name method
with the driver class name so you'll see
lots of older examples around the
internet that uses for name method and
that's just why I'm mentioning it here now
so the older version we would have to do
something like...
...
....so just
commented out so there's actually two
ways of establishing connection using
jdbc 4.0 so one is using the driver
manager as we've done here and the other
is using data source objects now the
later is sometimes the preferred way and
that's because it allows advanced
features like connection pooling and
distributed transactions and it's also
more portable because of the way
connections are established now we don't
need these features when using sqlite
and they require that database
administrators set up the database to
enable use of these features also a lot
more complicated to use data source
objects and they're really only needed
when working with large enterprise
applications particularly jee or java
enterprise edition applications now
we're not going to cover using data
source objects for that reason we're
gonna stick to using driver manager but
I'm just mentioning data source objects in
case you come across them although you
shouldn't unless you're actually working
on enterprise applications
alright so let's go ahead now run the
application to make sure we're picking
up the sqlite library that we've
added that it's working okay and we'll
just right click this and run it you can
see that it's completed ok we've got
no errors no exceptions
I'll just put this down the bottom but
more to the point down here over here
to the left of the project pane you can
see this test java dot bdb that's the
file the database automatically
created mean obviously got the path
correct and it's been successfully
created for us because it didn't exist
and again if you recall I said that when
you try to connect to a database in
sqlite if it doesn't exist
it tries or it actually creates the
database for you if you're getting
errors at this point make sure the
sqlite jdbc driver has been added
to the project and also check for typos
in the connection string so in the
case of windows make sure you are
escaping your backslashes and you've got
the exact path and also just as a
general rule is going to make sure you
got the exact case and don't rely on
your operating system to figure out
whether you meant the upper or lowercase
version of a letter
alright so next we're going to create
the contacts table that we created when
we were working with the test db
database from the command line in this
section now whenever we want to use
sql with jdbc we use what's called
statement objects so to create a table
going to call the connection . create
statement method and then we'll use the
statement executes method to run a
sql statement so let's look at
the code will type that in and will
talk about it i'm going to start on
the line after the connection going to
type in a statement....
....
...
....in this case we're creating the
table...
...
ok so after getting a connection
instance we creating this statement
instance and we are then calling the execute
method on line 17 and we're passing
the sql commands that we want to
execute in this case the sql to
create contacts table so basically
passing the same sql statement we've
used in the past when we created that
table using the command line now notice
that I didn't need to add the semicolon
to the end of the statement and that's
because the driver understands that when
we call execute we've passed a complete
sql statement and it's also important
to note that we created the statement
object by calling a connection method so
the statement as such as associated with
the connection and can only be running
against the database we connected to
when we created the connection instance
so let's actually run this to make
sure that it actually works and we don't
get any errors and we're not getting any
errors there
notice that the database there has
changed to the picture of a database
icon that indicates their is some data in
there and intelliJ is smart enough to
figure out that that's relating to a
database so let's go swing back
over to the DB browser let's go ahead
and open the database i'm going to open
it so there's my test db file I'm going to select
test javad . DB and click on open you
can see there that we now got a
contacts table and i can expand that now
you can see that we've got the various
fields we've got the name of the phone
and the email
alright so that's good now the
connection on statement objects used
database resources so when we finish
with them we should actually close them
if we don't the java runtime will
eventually closed them for us but it is
actually good programming practice to
close a resource as soon as we finish
using it and we're sure that we don't
need it again now in Trivial
applications like this one it doesn't
matter but in large applications that
use multiple database connections if
you're not closing resources that you
don't need is possible that you're
running out of resources and the
application would no longer be able to
work with the database or perhaps the
performance of the application will
degrade so it's obviously very important
make sure that you are closing the
connections once you're finished using
them now one of the things you could do
we've talked about this earlier in the
course using the newest style of the tri
statement and we can get that too close
for us automatically so let's just
change the code so you can see that
syntax is going to be try i'm just going
to copy the connection line to so you recall
the syntax that the newest style try
and paste in the connection with driver
manager semicolon then on the next line
also add a statement line....
....
...
...I'm going to just change that
going to file project structure click on
project i'm going to choose version 8
click on ok so I used the
new try with resources connection here
and the advantage of this is that the
resources will be closed when the try
catch block is exited so that's an
alternate way of actually doing it that
i recommend but for now what I'm going
to do is stick with explicitly closing
any resource we no longer need to drive
home that must be done this way
so what I'm going to do is take a copy
of this duplicate it and commented those
three lines and i'm just going to revert
back to the old format
and I got a problem here which I just fix
as well and this is reformat the code
so we'll just stick to that
version by leaving it in the comments
anyway so you can know that you can
actually do the try with resources if
you want to automatically be closed but
I want to get us to get into the
habit of just closing this manually
because it's a good habit to get into as
a rule so basically after the execute we
want do a statement....
...
just a final note before i finish this video
the order in which we close database
resources is important you should close
any statement instances before we close
the connection if you think about it
that's logical because if we close the
connection first then the database has
been closed and actually what will
happen is the sql exception will be
thrown with a message sql error or
missing database and again that's
because the connections is close so
remember that a statement is associated
with a connection so it's sort of
hanging on using that connection so if your closing
the connection we can't actually
use any statements that were associated
with it
alright so now that we're close the
database resources in our code let's
just run it again and oops we actually
got an error here now the message
printed to the console down the bottom
says that the contacts table already
exists now we're trying to create the
table again which is an error
let's start looking at that and how to
fix this in the next video